---
layout: post
title:  "Introduction to SQLcl"
author: "Sagiv Barhoom"
date:   2023-08-09
categories: ORACLE 
background: '/img/posts/be-linux.jpg.jpg'
---


# Introduction to SQLcl


## Installation and setup of SQLcl on various operating systems.
1. download from [Oracle site](https://www.oracle.com/database/sqldeveloper/technologies/sqlcl/download/)
2. unzip
3. add to path

## Connecting to an Oracle Database on-premises
```bash
sql username/password@//hostname:port/service_name
sql username/password@tns_alias
```
Here are some examples:
```bash
sql HR/HR@//localhost:1521/ORCL
sql HR/HR@orcl_tns
```

## Like sqlplus but better UX
### try the following:
```
set echo on
set define off
set timing on 
set time on
```
Most of sqlplus features exists.

## get help
examples:
* help
* help connect
...


### some hotkeys (Hey just like in bash terminal...)
* `Tab`: Auto-completes commands, keywords, table names, and more.
* `Ctrl + C`: Interrupts the currently running command or script.
* `Ctrl + L`: Clears the screen, providing a clean command-line interface.
* `Ctrl + D`: Exits SQLcl and closes the current session.
* `Up Arrow|Down Arrow`: Scrolls through previously|next entered commands.
* `Ctrl + R`: Initiates a reverse search in command history. Press repeatedly to cycle through matching commands.
* `Ctrl + E`: Moves the cursor to the end of the current line.
* `Ctrl + A`: Moves the cursor to the beginning of the current line.
* `Ctrl + U`: Clears the current line from the cursor position to the beginning.
* `Ctrl + K`: Clears the current line from the cursor position to the end.
* `Ctrl + W`: Deletes the word to the left of the cursor.
* `Ctrl + Y`: Pastes the last deleted or cut text.
* `Ctrl + H`: Shows the command history.
* `Ctrl + P`: Moves to the previous line in the command history.
* `Ctrl + N`: Moves to the next line in the command history.
* `Ctrl + T`: Swaps the current character with the previous one.
* `Ctrl + F`: Moves the cursor forward one character.
* `Ctrl + B`: Moves the cursor backward one character.
* `Ctrl + Z`: Suspends the current SQLcl session. Use the fg command to bring it back to the foreground.
* `Ctrl + S`: Stops the output from scrolling, useful for reviewing large outputs.


## Formatting and Output:
### Format options:
DEFAULT|CSV|HTML|XML|JSON|ANSICONSOLE|INSERT|LOADER|FIXED|DELIMITED

- `DEFAULT` - The DEFAULT option clears all previous SQLFORMAT settings and returns to the default output.
- `ANSICONSOLE` - The ANSICONSOLE format resizes the columns to the width of the data to save space.
- `INSERT` - The INSERT format produces the INSERT statements that could be used to recreate the rows in a table.
- `LOADER` - The LOADER format produces pipe delimited output with string values enclosed by double-quotes. The column names are not included in the output.
             this format is useful for generating SQLLoader control files.  
- `DELIMITED <delimiter> <left enclosure> <right enclosure>` - The DELIMITED format is a special case, which allows you to manually define the delimiter string, as well as the characters that will be used to enclose string values. The basic format is as follows.

### as hint
```sql
SELECT /*csv*/ * FROM emp;
SELECT /*html*/ * FROM emp;
```
### as set command
```sql
SET SQLFORMAT JSON-FORMATTED
SELECT * FROM emp WHERE deptno = 20;
```

## Spooling example (just like in SQLPLUS)
```sql
SET SQLFORMAT csv
SPOOL sales_export.csv
SELECT order_id, customer_name, order_amount, order_date
FROM sales_data;
SPOOL OFF
EXIT;
```

## Scripting and Automation (just like in SQLPLUS)
### export data to csv file
Lets save the example above as file:`generate_report.sql` 
Here is an example of data export into csv file
```bash
sql user/password@mytns_name @generate_report.sql
```

### import data from csv file
```sql
SET SQLFORMAT csv

-- Load data from the CSV file into the employee_data table
-- Note: You might need to adjust the column names and delimiter based on your 
--       CSV format
LOAD DATA
INFILE 'employee_import.csv'
APPEND
INTO TABLE employee_data
FIELDS TERMINATED BY ','
(employee_id, first_name, last_name, job_id)
```

## APEX and sqlcl
### apex list
This command list all installed APEX applications in a workspace.
We can also list applications in a workspace changed on or after a given date
```sql
apex export -list -workspaceid 1908816359534887 -changesSince 2022-01-15
```
### apex export
export an application to a single file 
```sql
apex export -applicationid 1234
```

Exporting an Application Split into Multiple Files
```sql
apex export -applicationid 1234 -split
```
